CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to VneTemplate

Thank you for your interest in contributing. This document explains how to build, test, and format the project so your contributions fit the repository standards.

## Building

- **Prerequisites:** CMake 3.19+, C++20 compiler. See [README.md](README.md#prerequisites).
- **Dependencies:** Initialize submodules from the project root:
  ```bash
  git submodule update --init --recursive
  ```
- **Configure and build:**
  ```bash
  cmake -B build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug -DVNE_TEMPLATE_TESTS=ON
  cmake --build build
  ```
- **Tests and examples:** `-DVNE_TEMPLATE_DEV=ON`, or set `-DVNE_TEMPLATE_TESTS=ON` and `-DVNE_TEMPLATE_EXAMPLES=ON` separately.
- **Platform scripts:** See [scripts/README.md](scripts/README.md) for `build_linux.sh`, `build_macos.sh`, `build_windows.sh`, `build_windows.py`, and `build_windows.ps1`.

## Testing

- Run tests:
  ```bash
  ctest --test-dir build -C Debug --output-on-failure
  ```
- Or use the script test action, e.g. `./scripts/build_macos.sh -a test`.

## Code style and formatting

- **Formatting** is enforced in CI. Before pushing, run the project formatter so CI passes:
  ```bash
  ./scripts/format.sh
  ```
  Or use the same command as CI: format `src`, `include`, `examples`, and `tests` with the project `.clang-format` (see [.github/workflows/ci.yml](.github/workflows/ci.yml)).
- **Style and naming** are defined in [CODING_GUIDELINES.md](CODING_GUIDELINES.md). Formatting is enforced by [.clang-format](.clang-format) and static analysis by [.clang-tidy](.clang-tidy). Please follow these so reviews can focus on design and logic.

## Pull requests

- Ensure the project builds and tests pass (locally or via CI).
- Keep changes focused. **Changelog:** We use [release-please](https://github.com/googleapis/release-please); do not hand-edit CHANGELOG.md for versioned entries. Use **Conventional Commits** (or PR titles) so release-please can generate notes: `feat:`, `fix:`, `perf:`, `docs:`, `chore:`, `ci:` (e.g. `feat: add shader cache`). When the release PR is merged, CHANGELOG and VERSION are updated and a tag is created.
- If you add or change behavior, add or update tests as appropriate.

## Code review

- Reviews follow the repository [Copilot PR review instructions](.github/copilot-instructions.md) and [CODING_GUIDELINES.md](CODING_GUIDELINES.md). Addressing feedback on correctness, API design, and test quality will speed up merging.

Commit message:

fix(vertexnova): Update CONTRIBUTING.md and README.md to clarify Conventional Commits usage for release management. Enhanced guidelines for commit message formatting and added instructions for initial release setup. (#4)

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to VneTemplate

Thank you for your interest in contributing. This document explains how to build, test, and format the project so your contributions fit the repository standards.

## Building

- **Prerequisites:** CMake 3.19+, C++20 compiler. See [README.md](README.md#prerequisites).
- **Dependencies:** Initialize submodules from the project root:
  ```bash
  git submodule update --init --recursive
  ```
- **Configure and build:**
  ```bash
  cmake -B build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug -DVNE_TEMPLATE_TESTS=ON
  cmake --build build
  ```
- **Tests and examples:** `-DVNE_TEMPLATE_DEV=ON`, or set `-DVNE_TEMPLATE_TESTS=ON` and `-DVNE_TEMPLATE_EXAMPLES=ON` separately.
- **Platform scripts:** See [scripts/README.md](scripts/README.md) for `build_linux.sh`, `build_macos.sh`, `build_windows.sh`, `build_windows.py`, and `build_windows.ps1`.

## Testing

- Run tests:
  ```bash
  ctest --test-dir build -C Debug --output-on-failure
  ```
- Or use the script test action, e.g. `./scripts/build_macos.sh -a test`.

## Code style and formatting

- **Formatting** is enforced in CI. Before pushing, run the project formatter so CI passes:
  ```bash
  ./scripts/format.sh
  ```
  Or use the same command as CI: format `src`, `include`, `examples`, and `tests` with the project `.clang-format` (see [.github/workflows/ci.yml](.github/workflows/ci.yml)).
- **Style and naming** are defined in [CODING_GUIDELINES.md](CODING_GUIDELINES.md). Formatting is enforced by [.clang-format](.clang-format) and static analysis by [.clang-tidy](.clang-tidy). Please follow these so reviews can focus on design and logic.

## Pull requests

- Ensure the project builds and tests pass (locally or via CI).
- Keep changes focused. **Changelog:** We use [release-please](https://github.com/googleapis/release-please); do not hand-edit CHANGELOG.md for versioned entries. Use **Conventional Commits** (or PR titles) so release-please can generate notes. Format: `type(scope): description` or `type: description`. Types: `feat`, `fix`, `perf`, `docs`, `chore`, `ci`. You can use the scope `vertexnova` if you like (e.g. `feat(vertexnova): add logging`, `chore(vertexnova): prepare release`). Commits that don’t start with a type (e.g. "Add logging..." or "Merge pull request...") are ignored by release-please, so use the conventional form for every commit you want in the release notes. When the release PR is merged, CHANGELOG and VERSION are updated and a tag is created.
- If you add or change behavior, add or update tests as appropriate.

## Code review

- Reviews follow the repository [Copilot PR review instructions](.github/copilot-instructions.md) and [CODING_GUIDELINES.md](CODING_GUIDELINES.md). Addressing feedback on correctness, API design, and test quality will speed up merging.
